----------------------------------------------------------------------
ABBREV_TAC                                                         (Q)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Q.ABBREV_TAC : term quotation -> tactic

SYNOPSIS
Introduces an abbreviation into a goal.

DESCRIBE
The tactic {Q.ABBREV_TAC q} parses the quotation {q} in the context of
the goal to which it is applied.  The result must be a term of the
form {v = e} with {v} a variable.  The effect of the tactic is to
replace the term {e} wherever it occurs in the goal by {v} (or a
primed variant of {v} if {v} already occurs in the goal), and to add
the assumption {Abbrev(v = e)} to the goal’s assumptions.  Again, if
{v} already occurs free in the goal, then the new assumption will be
{Abbrev(v' = e)}, with {v'} a suitably primed version of {v}.

It is not an error if the expression {e} does not occur anywhere
within the goal.  In this situation, the effect of the tactic is
simply to add the assumption {Abbrev(v = e)}.

The {Abbrev} constant is defined in {markerTheory} to be the identity
function over boolean values.  It is used solely as a tag, so that
abbreviations can be found by other tools, and so that simplification
tactics such as {RW_TAC} will not eliminate them.  When it sees them
as part of its context, the simplifier treats terms of the form
{Abbrev(v = e)} as assumptions {e = v}.  In this way, the simplifier
can use abbreviations to create further sharing, after an
abbreviation’s creation.

FAILURE
Fails if the quotation is ill-typed.  This may happen because
variables in the quotation that also appear in the goal are given the
same type in the quotation as they have in the goal.  Also fails if
the variable of the equation appears in the expression that it is
supposed to be abbreviating.

EXAMPLE
Substitution in the goal:

   - Q.ABBREV_TAC `n = 10` ([], ``10 < 9 * 10``);
   > val it = ([([``Abbrev(n = 10)``], ``n < 9 * n``)], fn) :
     (term list * term) list * (thm list -> thm)

and the assumptions:

   - Q.ABBREV_TAC `m = n + 2` ([``f (n + 2) < 6``], ``n < 7``);
   > val it = ([([``Abbrev(m = n + 2)``, ``f m < 6``], ``n < 7``)], fn) :
     (term list * term) list * (thm list -> thm)

and both

   - Q.ABBREV_TAC `u = x ** 32` ([``x ** 32 = f z``],
                                  ``g (x ** 32 + 6) - 10 < 65``);
   > val it =
       ([([``Abbrev(u = x ** 32)``, ``u = f z``], ``g (u + 6) - 10 < 65``)],
        fn) :
       (term list * term) list * (thm list -> thm)


COMMENTS
Though it is possible to abbreviate functions, using quotations such
as {`f = \n. n + 3`}, in this case {ABBREV_TAC} will not do anything
more than replace exact copies of the abstraction.  Following
{ABBREV_TAC} with

   POP_ASSUM (ASSUME_TAC o GSYM o
              SIMP_RULE bool_ss [FUN_EQ_THM, markerTheory.Abbrev_def])

will turn the assumption {`Abbrev(f = (\n. n + 3))`} into
{`!n. n + 3 = f n`} which may find more instances of the desired
pattern.

SEEALSO
BasicProvers.Abbr, Q.HO_MATCH_ABBREV_TAC, Q.MATCH_ABBREV_TAC,
Q.UNABBREV_TAC.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
